# Enter obserQAbility !!
This repository will give you an introduction into the principles of obserQAbility, together with some examples.

## What is observability (o11y)?
Observability is to be able to know the internal state of something through information available externally.

In other words, to know how is something without lifting the lid.

## What do I need to achieve o11y?
There are some requirements you must fulfill if you want to have o11y:

- Telemetry: The capacity to transfer information from the insides of your software. This is achieved through the second requirement.
- Instrumentation: Is the insertion of code, libraries or devices that enable telemetry and transmit elsewhere the information of interest. This could be done manually, or through Client Libraries, or through agents.
- Storage: If you need to analyze past information about your software, you need somewhere to store that information. Usually time based databases, but any storage can work.
- Visualizations: Data generated by o11y often comes in formats that humans cannot understand. You need visualization platforms to display and refresh the data in pretty and easy to understand images. 

# What is ObserQAbility
ObserQAbility (I would like to short it as oQAy, pronounced as Oh-kiu-ey-ee) is the fusion of two practices, QA and Observability. Which means integrating these practices both ways, o11y techniques inside of QA practices, and QA techniques integrated inside o11y.

- QA inside o11y: You can add tests, validations, verifications, assertions and all sorts of QA things inside of instrumentations or o11y settings.
- o11y inside QA: You can add o11y principles to your QA automations obtaining all of its benefits fo quality.
- Mix it all: of course, the sky is the limit. o11y is a great power to apply in all of your processes!

## Examples

In the examples section you will find a few examples on how could you embrace ObserQAbility.

[To examples](./examples/README.md)

In this section I will list some examples I have thought on how to apply obserQAbility. But again these are no all there is, if you think of other options please let me know.

## What we will need

For these examples I want you to understand the priciples of o11y, so almost everything will be done manually. We could use Agents or Client Libraries (CL) but I prefer to show you the guts and principles so that when you use automated o11y, you know what is happening.

We will use open and free software here!
- JavaScript to code (mostly cause I like it and I feel it universal)
- InfluxDB to store data (*PLEASE GET V1.x! AVOID VERSIONS 2 & 3*)
- Grafana to visualize everything
- k6 for QA of APIs and some performance
- Selenium for functional automations
